doc/compiler/runtime/JITHooks.md, before:

<!--
Copyright IBM Corp. and others 2020

This program and the accompanying materials are made available under
the terms of the Eclipse Public License 2.0 which accompanies this
distribution and is available at https://www.eclipse.org/legal/epl-2.0/
or the Apache License, Version 2.0 which accompanies this distribution and
is available at https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.

This Source Code may also be made available under the following
Secondary Licenses when the conditions for such availability set
forth in the Eclipse Public License, v. 2.0 are satisfied: GNU
General Public License, version 2 with the GNU Classpath
Exception [1] and GNU General Public License, version 2 with the
OpenJDK Assembly Exception [2].

[1] https://www.gnu.org/software/classpath/license.html
[2] https://openjdk.org/legal/assembly-exception.html

SPDX-License-Identifier: EPL-2.0 OR Apache-2.0 OR GPL-2.0-only WITH Classpath-exception-2.0 OR GPL-2.0-only WITH OpenJDK-assembly-exception-1.0
-->

# Background

The VM has a hook mechanism that is used to perform actions for specific
runtime events. It also provides the ability to register callbacks for
these events. Some hooks impact the generation of compiled code, and
others require the JIT to perform tasks either for functional
correctness, performance, or housekeeping. This doc outlines the various
Hooks that are of interest for the JIT.

# Hooks that Impact Compiled Code
This section outlines various events or Hooks that impact the code that
the JIT generates.

**IMPORTANT**: The way the compiler tests if one of these
events can be hooked is by calling `J9HookDisable`; if the return value
is `0` then the event cannot be hooked, and if the return value is
**not** `0` then the event **can** be hooked. However, it should be
pointed out that when `J9HookDisable` returns `0`, it either successfully
disabled the hook or the hook was already successfully disabled in some
prior invocation. It is critical that the JIT uses this API rather than
just test whether the event could be hooked via `J9_EVENT_IS_HOOKED`/
`J9_EVENT_IS_RESERVED`. Because the JIT generates code based on the
JVM environment, it needs to ensure that the environment does not change.
If `J9HookDisable` is not used, then a JVMTI agent could attach to the
JVM at some later point and see that an event (that the JIT assumed was
not going to be hooked) can indeed be hooked. It can then request that
the JVM report such an event. However, existing generated code will be
unable to fulfil this request. `J9HookDisable` allows the JIT to
prevent such an agent from making such a request.

|Hook|Description|Comment|
|--|--|--|
|`J9HOOK_VM_POP_FRAMES_INTERRUPT`|Triggered when popping a frame from an async checkpoint.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_BREAKPOINT`|Triggered when a breakpointed bytecode is executed.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_FRAME_POPPED`|Triggered when a pop-protected frame is popped from the stack.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_FRAME_POP`|Triggered when a method is about to return.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_GET_FIELD`|Triggered before reading from an instance field.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_PUT_FIELD`|Triggered before storing to an instance field.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_GET_STATIC_FIELD`|Triggered before reading from a static field.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_PUT_STATIC_FIELD`|Triggered before storing to an instance field.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_SINGLE_STEP`|Triggered before executing each bytecode.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_EXCEPTION_CATCH`|Triggered when an exception is about to be caught.||
|`J9HOOK_VM_EXCEPTION_THROW`|Triggered before an exception is thrown.||
|`J9HOOK_VM_METHOD_ENTER`|Triggered when entering a method.||
|`J9HOOK_VM_METHOD_RETURN`|Triggered before a method returns.||
|`J9HOOK_VM_OBJECT_ALLOCATE_INSTRUMENTABLE`|Triggered after an object is allocated.||

# Hooks with Registered Callbacks
This section outlines various events or Hooks the JIT registers a callback
against. The callbacks associated with these Hooks can be found in
HookedByTheJit.cpp.

|Hook|Description|Comment|Locks Held<sup>1</sup>|
|--|--|--|--|
|`J9HOOK_VM_PROFILING_BYTECODE_BUFFER_FULL`|Notifies when the bytecode profiling buffer (consumed by the IProfiler) for a given thread is full.||VM Access, IProfiler Buffer Arrival Monitor|
|`J9HOOK_VM_LOOKUP_JNI_ID`|Notifies when a method or field ID is looked up via JNI.|The JIT uses this to get notified when `main` in the Java code is about to be run; it then unregisters this hook.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_VM_INITIALIZE_SEND_TARGET`|Notifies when J9Methods are to have their send target initialized.|Used to set initial invocation counts.||
|`J9HOOK_MM_OMR_LOCAL_GC_START`|Notifies when a local Garbage Collection has started.|Local here applies to policies such as GenCon, where only the nursery region is being GC'd.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_OMR_LOCAL_GC_END`|Notifies when a local GC has ended|If Real Time GC is enabled, the JIT registers `jitHookLocalGCEnd`; otherwise it registers `jitHookReleaseCodeLocalGCEnd`.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GLOBAL_GC_START`|Notifies when a global GC has started.|Global here implies a GC of the entire heap.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GLOBAL_GC_END`|Notifies when a global GC has ended.|If Real Time GC is enabled, the JIT registers `jitHookGlobalGCEnd`; otherwise it registers `jitHookReleaseCodeGlobalGCEnd`.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GC_CYCLE_END`|Notifies when the GC Cycle has ended.|The JIT only registers against this hook if Real Time GC is enabled.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_VM_INTERNAL_CLASS_LOAD`|Notifies when a class has been loaded.||Class Table Mutex|
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_PREINITIALIZE`|Notifies the initialization of a class prior to running the `<clinit>`.||Class Table Mutex|
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_INITIALIZE`|Notifies the initialization of a class after running the `<clint>`.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_UNLOAD`|Notifies when a class has been unloaded.||Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASSES_UNLOAD`|Notifies with the list of classes that have been unloaded.||Exclusive VM Access, Class Table Mutex, Compilation Monitor|
|`J9HOOK_VM_ANON_CLASSES_UNLOAD`|Notifies with the list of anonymous classes that have been unloaded. ||Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_LOADER_UNLOAD`|Notifies with the list of classloaders that have been unloaded.|The JIT uses this hook to clean up the DLT buffers.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_LOADERS_UNLOAD`|Notifies for each classloader that is unloaded.||Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_CLASS_UNLOADING_END`|Notifies that the GC has finished unloading classes.||Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_INTERRUPT_COMPILATION`|Notifies that JIT compilation should be interrupted in order for the GC to unload classes.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_CREATED`|Notifies when a thread has been created.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_DESTROY`|Notifies when a thread has been destroyed.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_STARTED`|Notifies when a thread has started running.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_END`|Notifies when a thread has finished running.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_CRASH`|Notifies when a thread has crashed.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_JNI_NATIVE_REGISTERED`|Notifies when a native has been registered.||Assumption Table Mutex|
|`J9HOOK_VM_PREPARING_FOR_CHECKPOINT`|Notifies when the VM is about to checkpoint itself.|Only applies for CRIU Support.|Compilation Monitor, CheckpointRestore Monitor|
|`J9HOOK_VM_PREPARING_FOR_RESTORE`|Notifies when the VM has restored from a checkpoint.|Only applies for CRIU Support.|Compilation Monitor|

## Chronological Order of Hooks with Registered Callbacks
Certain hooks will be invoked in a specific order because they relate to
a defined set of events that occur in the VM, for example GC. This
section outlines the order in which these hooks get triggered (assuming
no failures or error conditions).

### Garbage Collection
1. `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GC_CYCLE_START`
2. `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_LOCAL_GC_START` or `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GLOBAL_GC_START`
3. `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_LOCAL_GC_END` or `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GLOBAL_GC_END`
4. `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GC_CYCLE_END`

### Class Loading/Unloading
1. `J9HOOK_VM_INTERNAL_CLASS_LOAD`
2. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_PREINITIALIZE`
3. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_INITIALIZE`
4. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_UNLOAD`
5. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASSES_UNLOAD`
6. `J9HOOK_VM_ANON_CLASSES_UNLOAD`
7. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_LOADERS_UNLOAD`
8. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_LOADER_UNLOAD`

### Threads
1. `J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_CREATED`
2. `J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_STARTED`
3. `J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_END `
4. `J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_DESTROY`

<hr/>

1. The locks are not necessarily all held simultaneously.

Commit message:

Optimize continuation walkframe processing for JIT codecache reclaim
JIT code cache reclaim is generally triggered via end of GC event,
it requires walk the java stack of all live continuation Objects to
keep the related resource in code cache for the virtual threads,
currently JIT uses single thread to iterate the global continuation list
for the processing, it might generate up to 5-30% regression for
throughput performance, use all of GC threads parallel iterating the
list during GC clearable phase could improve CPUs usage and reduce the
processing time(STW time).

 - parallel iterating continuation list at the end of GC clearable phase
 (except realtime)
 - register new J9HOOK_MM_WALKCONTINUATION event to callback jit java
  stack walk for code cache reclaim.
 - JIT code cache reclaim is triggered by every end of GC event, but the
processing is only needed when jitConfig->methodsToDelete is not NULL.
 - not every GC has clearable phase (such as final complete phase(STW)
of concurrent scavenger, skip the processing or enable single thread
iterating(old way) for the case.

Signed-off-by: Lin Hu <linhu@ca.ibm.com>

doc/compiler/runtime/JITHooks.md, after:

<!--
Copyright IBM Corp. and others 2020

This program and the accompanying materials are made available under
the terms of the Eclipse Public License 2.0 which accompanies this
distribution and is available at https://www.eclipse.org/legal/epl-2.0/
or the Apache License, Version 2.0 which accompanies this distribution and
is available at https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.

This Source Code may also be made available under the following
Secondary Licenses when the conditions for such availability set
forth in the Eclipse Public License, v. 2.0 are satisfied: GNU
General Public License, version 2 with the GNU Classpath
Exception [1] and GNU General Public License, version 2 with the
OpenJDK Assembly Exception [2].

[1] https://www.gnu.org/software/classpath/license.html
[2] https://openjdk.org/legal/assembly-exception.html

SPDX-License-Identifier: EPL-2.0 OR Apache-2.0 OR GPL-2.0-only WITH Classpath-exception-2.0 OR GPL-2.0-only WITH OpenJDK-assembly-exception-1.0
-->

# Background

The VM has a hook mechanism that is used to perform actions for specific
runtime events. It also provides the ability to register callbacks for
these events. Some hooks impact the generation of compiled code, and
others require the JIT to perform tasks either for functional
correctness, performance, or housekeeping. This doc outlines the various
Hooks that are of interest for the JIT.

# Hooks that Impact Compiled Code
This section outlines various events or Hooks that impact the code that
the JIT generates.

**IMPORTANT**: The way the compiler tests if one of these
events can be hooked is by calling `J9HookDisable`; if the return value
is `0` then the event cannot be hooked, and if the return value is
**not** `0` then the event **can** be hooked. However, it should be
pointed out that when `J9HookDisable` returns `0`, it either successfully
disabled the hook or the hook was already successfully disabled in some
prior invocation. It is critical that the JIT uses this API rather than
just test whether the event could be hooked via `J9_EVENT_IS_HOOKED`/
`J9_EVENT_IS_RESERVED`. Because the JIT generates code based on the
JVM environment, it needs to ensure that the environment does not change.
If `J9HookDisable` is not used, then a JVMTI agent could attach to the
JVM at some later point and see that an event (that the JIT assumed was
not going to be hooked) can indeed be hooked. It can then request that
the JVM report such an event. However, existing generated code will be
unable to fulfil this request. `J9HookDisable` allows the JIT to
prevent such an agent from making such a request.

|Hook|Description|Comment|
|--|--|--|
|`J9HOOK_VM_POP_FRAMES_INTERRUPT`|Triggered when popping a frame from an async checkpoint.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_BREAKPOINT`|Triggered when a breakpointed bytecode is executed.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_FRAME_POPPED`|Triggered when a pop-protected frame is popped from the stack.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_FRAME_POP`|Triggered when a method is about to return.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_GET_FIELD`|Triggered before reading from an instance field.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_PUT_FIELD`|Triggered before storing to an instance field.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_GET_STATIC_FIELD`|Triggered before reading from a static field.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_PUT_STATIC_FIELD`|Triggered before storing to an instance field.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_SINGLE_STEP`|Triggered before executing each bytecode.|If enabled, the JIT runs in FSD mode.|
|`J9HOOK_VM_EXCEPTION_CATCH`|Triggered when an exception is about to be caught.||
|`J9HOOK_VM_EXCEPTION_THROW`|Triggered before an exception is thrown.||
|`J9HOOK_VM_METHOD_ENTER`|Triggered when entering a method.||
|`J9HOOK_VM_METHOD_RETURN`|Triggered before a method returns.||
|`J9HOOK_VM_OBJECT_ALLOCATE_INSTRUMENTABLE`|Triggered after an object is allocated.||

# Hooks with Registered Callbacks
This section outlines various events or Hooks the JIT registers a callback
against. The callbacks associated with these Hooks can be found in
HookedByTheJit.cpp.

|Hook|Description|Comment|Locks Held<sup>1</sup>|
|--|--|--|--|
|`J9HOOK_VM_PROFILING_BYTECODE_BUFFER_FULL`|Notifies when the bytecode profiling buffer (consumed by the IProfiler) for a given thread is full.||VM Access, IProfiler Buffer Arrival Monitor|
|`J9HOOK_VM_LOOKUP_JNI_ID`|Notifies when a method or field ID is looked up via JNI.|The JIT uses this to get notified when `main` in the Java code is about to be run; it then unregisters this hook.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_VM_INITIALIZE_SEND_TARGET`|Notifies when J9Methods are to have their send target initialized.|Used to set initial invocation counts.||
|`J9HOOK_MM_OMR_LOCAL_GC_START`|Notifies when a local Garbage Collection has started.|Local here applies to policies such as GenCon, where only the nursery region is being GC'd.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_OMR_LOCAL_GC_END`|Notifies when a local GC has ended|If Real Time GC is enabled, the JIT registers `jitHookLocalGCEnd`; otherwise it registers `jitHookReleaseCodeLocalGCEnd`.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GLOBAL_GC_START`|Notifies when a global GC has started.|Global here implies a GC of the entire heap.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GLOBAL_GC_END`|Notifies when a global GC has ended.|If Real Time GC is enabled, the JIT registers `jitHookGlobalGCEnd`; otherwise it registers `jitHookReleaseCodeGlobalGCEnd`.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GC_CYCLE_END`|Notifies when the GC Cycle has ended.|The JIT only registers against this hook if Real Time GC is enabled.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_VM_INTERNAL_CLASS_LOAD`|Notifies when a class has been loaded.||Class Table Mutex|
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_PREINITIALIZE`|Notifies the initialization of a class prior to running the `<clinit>`.||Class Table Mutex|
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_INITIALIZE`|Notifies the initialization of a class after running the `<clint>`.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_UNLOAD`|Notifies when a class has been unloaded.||Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASSES_UNLOAD`|Notifies with the list of classes that have been unloaded.||Exclusive VM Access, Class Table Mutex, Compilation Monitor|
|`J9HOOK_VM_ANON_CLASSES_UNLOAD`|Notifies with the list of anonymous classes that have been unloaded. ||Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_LOADER_UNLOAD`|Notifies with the list of classloaders that have been unloaded.|The JIT uses this hook to clean up the DLT buffers.|Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_LOADERS_UNLOAD`|Notifies for each classloader that is unloaded.||Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_CLASS_UNLOADING_END`|Notifies that the GC has finished unloading classes.||Exclusive VM Access|
|`J9HOOK_MM_INTERRUPT_COMPILATION`|Notifies that JIT compilation should be interrupted in order for the GC to unload classes.|||
|`J9HOOK_MM_WALKCONTINUATION`|Notifies when iterating continuation Object during GC clearable phase.|The JIT uses this hook to walk through related java stacks for preparing code cache reclaim.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_CREATED`|Notifies when a thread has been created.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_DESTROY`|Notifies when a thread has been destroyed.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_STARTED`|Notifies when a thread has started running.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_END`|Notifies when a thread has finished running.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_CRASH`|Notifies when a thread has crashed.|||
|`J9HOOK_VM_JNI_NATIVE_REGISTERED`|Notifies when a native has been registered.||Assumption Table Mutex|
|`J9HOOK_VM_PREPARING_FOR_CHECKPOINT`|Notifies when the VM is about to checkpoint itself.|Only applies for CRIU Support.|Compilation Monitor, CheckpointRestore Monitor|
|`J9HOOK_VM_PREPARING_FOR_RESTORE`|Notifies when the VM has restored from a checkpoint.|Only applies for CRIU Support.|Compilation Monitor|

## Chronological Order of Hooks with Registered Callbacks
Certain hooks will be invoked in a specific order because they relate to
a defined set of events that occur in the VM, for example GC. This
section outlines the order in which these hooks get triggered (assuming
no failures or error conditions).

### Garbage Collection
1. `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GC_CYCLE_START`
2. `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_LOCAL_GC_START` or `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GLOBAL_GC_START`
3. `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_LOCAL_GC_END` or `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GLOBAL_GC_END`
4. `J9HOOK_MM_OMR_GC_CYCLE_END`

### Class Loading/Unloading
1. `J9HOOK_VM_INTERNAL_CLASS_LOAD`
2. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_PREINITIALIZE`
3. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_INITIALIZE`
4. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_UNLOAD`
5. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASSES_UNLOAD`
6. `J9HOOK_VM_ANON_CLASSES_UNLOAD`
7. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_LOADERS_UNLOAD`
8. `J9HOOK_VM_CLASS_LOADER_UNLOAD`

### Threads
1. `J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_CREATED`
2. `J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_STARTED`
3. `J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_END `
4. `J9HOOK_VM_THREAD_DESTROY`

<hr/>

1. The locks are not necessarily all held simultaneously.
